Plan Risk Management: Defines the scope and objectives of the Project Risk
Management process, and ensures that the risk process is fully integrated into wider project
management. 



other
 The objectives of the Plan Risk Management process are to develop the overall risk management strategy
for the project, to decide how the risk management processes will be executed, and to integrate Project Risk
Management with all other project management activities.
 Effective risk management requires creation of a risk management plan. This plan describes how the
risk management processes should be carried out and how they fit in with the other project management
processes. On a broader level, it describes the relationships among Project Risk Management, general project
management, and the management processes in the rest of the organization. To provide the greatest benefit,
initial risk management planning should be carried out early in the overall planning of the project, and the
corresponding risk management activities integrated into the overall project management plan. The risk
management plan may subsequently need to be adapted as the needs of the project and its stakeholders
become clearer or change.
 Although the Project Risk Management processes form an integral part of the overall project management
plan, a budget in terms of resources, cost, and time for the specific risk management activities should be
established in order to better track, control, and, as necessary, defend the corresponding expenditures
throughout the project. The cost of treating the risks themselves should be included appropriately in the project
budget, while the risk management plan should describe how this part of the project budget is evaluated,
allocated, and managed. The risk management plan will define the monitoring methods to ensure that the
corresponding expenditures are tracked appropriately, as well as the conditions under which the approved budget for risk management can be modified.
 In the same way that project management is a process of progressive elaboration, risk management
activities need to be repeated throughout the project. The risk management plan should define both the
normal frequency for repeating the processes as well as specific or exceptional conditions under which the
corresponding actions should be initiated. The corresponding risk management activities should be integrated
into the project management plan.
 There are two categories of success criteria for risk management: those for success of the project in
general, and those for success of Project Risk Management. (pmi)
To assess the success of Project Risk Management, the stakeholders
must agree on an acceptable level of results for the project-related criteria (such as cost, time, and
scope). In order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders, the risk management
plan should present these objectives with reference to the project definition documents. To provide
guidance in risk management, particularly in prioritizing risk responses, stakeholders should also
prioritize each project objective.
The measures for success in Project Risk Management depend on a
number of factors, such as the inherent level of uncertainty of the project. For example, the Project
Risk Management process for a research project needs to address more unforeseen changes than
for a project with a more predictable environment. A research Project Risk Management process
may be considered a success even if it results in more variance from the baseline than would be
allowable for a successful process in a more predictable project.
 The level of risk that is considered acceptable in a project depends on the risk attitudes of the relevant
stakeholders. The risk attitudes of both the organization and the stakeholders may be influenced by a number
of factors, all of which need to be identified. These include their inherent tolerance for uncertainty, and the
relative importance to them of achieving or missing specific project objectives. The output of this analysis
should then be taken into account for setting thresholds and providing weighting factors when applying the Project Risk Management processes in the specific project.
 Guidelines and rules for escalating risk-related information to management and other stakeholders should
reflect the risk attitudes and expectations of the corresponding stakeholders. The project manager should maintain effective communication with the stakeholders as the project evolves, in order to become aware of any changes in the stakeholders attitudes and adapt the risk management approach to take any new facts into account.
 It is important that the participants share a common understanding of all terms used to describe the risks,
and that the critical values and thresholds that will serve as parameters for the tools should be defined in a
manner consistent with the scope of the project and the attitudes of the stakeholders. If qualitative analysis
uses such terms as “high impact” or “medium probability,” these should be defined objectively in the risk
management plan. Similarly, the risk management plan should specify any key numerical values required in
quantitative analysis or for decision-making in risk response planning or risk monitoring and control.
 Risk management planning should establish the type and level of risk detail to be addressed and provide a
template of the risk register that will be used for recording risk-related information. The risk management plan
should also indicate the intensity of effort and the frequency with which the various Project Risk Management
processes should be applied; this depends on the characteristics of the project as well as on the specified risk
management objectives.
 In order for the Project Risk Management processes to be carried out correctly and effectively, the project
team and other stakeholders need to know where and when they will be expected to participate, their criteria
for determining success, their level of authority, and what action to take relative to actions or decisions beyond
this level. The risk management plan specifies the project’s risk management roles and responsibilities and
defines the corresponding expectations for both senior management and project personnel. (pmi)
Risk-related communication occurs at two levels: within the project team, and between the project team and the other project stakeholders. The principles for each of these categories of communication are
defined in the risk management plan. For the team, the plan describes the frequency and scope of the various
risk management meetings and reports required to carry out the corresponding Project Risk Management
processes as well as the structure and content of such meetings and reports. For the other stakeholders, the
plan sets their expectations as to the structure, content, and frequency of routine documents to be received
as well as the way in which information will be shared for escalation or exceptional events. Details of the
information required by the project team from stakeholders should also be clearly defined.
 
 The principal criteria for a valid risk management plan are acceptance by the stakeholders, alignment
with the internal and external constraints on the project, balance between cost or effort and benefit, and
completeness with respect to the needs of the Project Risk Management process. Critical success factors for the Plan Risk Management process are detailed below.
 The time and effort required to carry out the Plan Risk Management process will not be supported unless
the stakeholders, and especially management in the organization responsible for the project, recognize and
accept the benefits of managing risk, and the added value of addressing this as a skill in its own right rather
than as a passive or reactive component of general project management.
 A clear definition of the project objectives and a high-level view of the project environment and solution approach are required to provide a valid basis for risk management. The project manager should therefore
ensure that valid definition and planning information is available for the plan risk management activity.
 An organization inexperienced in risk management planning may need to develop its own approach and
may expend an inappropriate amount of time and effort on this. Alternatively it may use a proprietary or
pre-existing approach which requires tailoring. The availability of some or all of the following organizational
process assets contributes to the chances of success of the Plan Risk Management activities: standard
templates, predefined risk categories, and an established project management methodology incorporating
risk management procedures that specify what risk information is required for decision making, when it is
required, and a definition of concepts and terms, roles, responsibilities, and authority levels. Access to relevant
lessons learned at this stage will allow this experience to be taken into account from the start of the project.
 The risk management plan will not deliver its value unless Project Risk Management is carried out as an integral part of the project. The corresponding activities should be built into the project work breakdown
structure and included in the corresponding schedule, budget, and work-assignment documents. (pmi)
 The project manager needs to involve the project stakeholders in the Plan Risk Management activities to build on their skills and experience as well as to ensure their understanding of, and commitment to, the full
Project Risk Management process.
 The provision for risk management resources specified within the risk management plan should be approved by management at a level adequate for carrying out the required Project Risk Management processes
in accordance with agreed-upon objectives. Management should be involved in the analysis of the level of
resourcing required for managing project risk and accept the risks that may arise from specific limitations
placed on the provision of resources. Disagreements between stakeholders in the areas of risk tolerance and
evaluation measures should be addressed and resolved.
 The feasibility of risk management planning is dependent upon the features of the organization in which it is carried out. The rules and guidelines defined in the risk management plan should be compatible with the
culture of the organization, its capabilities from the point of view of people and facilities, and its values, goals, and objectives.
 Project management in general, and risk management in particular, contribute to the organization’s effective
governance. The risk management plan should identify and take into account the relevant organizational procedures and any other enterprise environmental factors that apply such as strategic risk management or
corporate governance processes.

The results of risk management planning are documented in the risk management plan. The plan serves
to provide all project stakeholders with a common view of how the risk-related activities of the project will be
handled, what has been agreed upon, and a description of the stakeholders’ involvement and responsibilities
in these activities.


Depending upon the size and complexity of the project, some or all of the following elements will be present
in a risk management plan.
• Introduction;
• Project description;
• Risk management methodology;
• Risk management organization;
• Roles, responsibilities, and authority;
• Stakeholder risk tolerance;
• Criteria for success;
• Risk management tools and guidelines for use;
• Thresholds and corresponding definitions;
• Templates;
• Communications plan;
• Strategy; and
• Risk breakdown structure.


