The risk management plan is a component of the project management plan and describes how risk management activities will be structured and performed. The risk management plan includes the following:
 Defines the approaches, tools, and data sources that will be used to perform risk
management on the project.
Defines the lead, support, and risk management team members for each
type of activity in the risk management plan, and clarifies their responsibilities.
Estimates funds needed, based on assigned resources, for inclusion in the cost baseline and
establishes protocols for application of contingency and management reserves.
Defines when and how often the risk management processes will be performed throughout the
project life cycle, establishes protocols for application of schedule contingency reserves, and establishes risk management activities for inclusion in the project schedule.




 Provide a means for grouping potential causes of risk. Several approaches can be
used, for example, a structure based on project objectives by category. A risk breakdown structure (RBS)
helps the project team to look at many sources from which project risk may arise in a risk identification exercise. Different RBS structures will be appropriate for different types of projects. An organization can use a previously prepared custom categorization framework, which may take the form of a simple list of
categories or may be structured into an RBS. The RBS is a hierarchical representation of risks according to their risk categories.


The quality and credibility of the risk analysis requires that different levels of risk probability and impact be defined that are specific to the project context. General
definitions of probability levels and impact levels are tailored to the individual project during the Plan Risk Management process for use in subsequent processes. 
A probability and impact matrix is a grid for mapping the probability of each risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives if that risk occurs. Risks are prioritized
according to their potential implications for having an effect on the project’s objectives.               A typical approach to prioritizing risks is to use a look-up table or a probability and impact matrix. The specific
combinations of probability and impact that lead to a risk being rated as “high,” “moderate,” or “low” importance are usually set by the organization.
Stakeholders’ tolerances, as they apply to the specific project, may
be revised in the Plan Risk Management process.
Reporting formats define how the outcomes of the risk management process will
be documented, analyzed, and communicated. It describes the content and format of the risk register as well as any other risk reports required.
Tracking documents how risk activities will be recorded for the benefit of the current project
and how risk management processes will be audited.

