the effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carried out. These plans should be executed correctly, reviewed, and updated regularly. If this is carried out correctly, the invested effort will be rewarded and future projects will beneﬁ t from this project’s experience.
he primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identiﬁed risks, monitor residual risks, identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. 
in addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current project as well as future ones. 
F or each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been deﬁned, the corresponding set of trigger conditions should have been speciﬁed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as deﬁned, in a timely manner. 
 Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions should have been included and deﬁned in the current project management plan. The ﬁrst action of risk monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary, such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. 
 The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of speciﬁc risks, apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in a timely manner. 
In addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented.

he primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identiﬁed risks, monitor residual risks, identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. 
In addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current project as well as future ones. 
F or each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been deﬁned, the corresponding set of trigger conditions should have been speciﬁed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as deﬁned, in a timely manner. 
 Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions should have been included and deﬁned in the current project management plan. The ﬁrst action of risk monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary, such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. 
 The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of speciﬁc risks, apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in a timely manner. 
In addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented.
As the project progresses, additional information becomes available and the project environment may change as some risks occur, whether foreseen or unforeseen, and others become or cease to be relevant. The planning should therefore be kept current and the project manager should ensure that periodic risk reassessment, including risk identiﬁcation, analysis, and response planning, is repeated at reasonable intervals, or in response to project events—without generating excessive administrative overhead. Typical reasons for risk reassessment are: 
 Occurrence of a major or unexpected risk, • Need to analyze a complex change request, • Phase end review, • Project re-planning or major plan elaboration, and • Periodic review to ensure that the information remains current. • 
I n the event of major organizational changes, risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to reassessing the risks. 
 In addition to the regular status reviews, periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and weaknesses in handling risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or keys to success in risk management, recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of the current or future projects. 
 At the end of the project, an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out with a focus on long-term process improvements. This analysis consolidates the ﬁnding of the periodic audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization’s projects in the future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time for the analysis, use of tools, level of detail, etc. 
A t project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of every risk in the risk register, for example: (a) did not occur; (b) occurred and contingency plan invoked; or (c) occurred and impact to the project scope (i.e., time, cost, and quality). 
The output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with speciﬁc information with respect to the project’s experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update to the corresponding organizational process assets. 
 An overview of the steps involved in the Monitor and Control Risks process is given in Figure 9-1.
critical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the characteristics and capabilities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 9.2.3.
From the start, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and control project risk. This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk response planning decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring speciﬁc conditions or metrics. Once risk response planning has been carried out, the project schedule should include all of the agreed-upon, response-related actions so that they can be carried out as a normal part of project execution and tracked accordingly.
risk response planning will have deﬁned a set of actions to be carried out as part of the project schedule as well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predeﬁned trigger condition. Checking for speciﬁcally deﬁned risks that may trigger conditional responses is the responsibility of the risk action owner, in close collaboration with the risk owner under the overall authority of the project manager.
Risk management reports should be a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that all team members remain aware of the importance of risk management and to ensure that it is fully integrated into all of the project management decisions. 
 The project’s senior-level sponsor should require regular reports on the risks and the planned responses to ensure that stakeholders are aware of the importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also motivates the project team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Project Risk Management. 
Stakeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in which risks are handled as they occur, and by the number or characteristics of such events. It is therefore crucial, whenever a risk occurs, that information about the event, as well as the progress and effectiveness of the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted to the needs of each stakeholder. This should be supported by a well-executed communications plan
he ﬁnal control action of risk monitoring and controlling is to record actual data for future use. This includes all of the relevant information relating to risk management from start to ﬁ nish of the project. The deﬁnition of what this information must include, as well as the storage mechanism, should have been previously speciﬁed in the risk management plan. 
The goal is to ensure that the signiﬁcant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data to the lessons learned process for inclusion in a lesson learned document, report, or other communication vehicle. Typical information includes the following: 
  For each identiﬁed risk or type of risk, whether it occurred, and, if so, when and how often. All • relevant data should be recorded: impact, effectiveness of detection and of response, and any unplanned, additional actions that were carried out.  Effectiveness of avoidance or exploitation actions. •  Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions. •  Unexpected or undocumented risks which occurred and data about them. •  Effectiveness of risk mitigation and enhancement actions. •  Occurrence of accepted threats or opportunities. • 
Consolidated information should be provided on the level of effort expended. Costs and beneﬁts to the project of risk management activities should also be provided. 
This information will need to be archived and indexed in a manner that will facilitate retrieval for easy review during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises. 
