In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilities, risk monitoring and controlling requires a focus on the tools which will support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as well as individual risks.
Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-related and cost-related risks. Techniques are required that allow the project manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the required level of conﬁdence in the success of the project. 
 Tools for managing time buffers should be closely integrated into the project’s scheduling techniques, whereas those for managing cost should be compatible with the ﬁnancial practices. Tools are required to identify trends and forecast future outcomes to determine whether the reserves will remain sufﬁcient. Tools are also required for tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner.
rigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are deﬁned during the Plan Risk Responses process. Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions against the project baseline or speciﬁed thresholds, based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related to the deliverables, such as performance, as well as on project-related features, such as time and cost. 
Tools are required in order to determine, as the project progresses, whether the responses are having the expected effect on the project’s overall level of risk.
I n order to monitor the quality of the execution of the risk-related plans and processes, a set of quality metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will normally have been deﬁned in the risk management plan.
Control Risks often results in identification of new risks, reassessment of current risks, and the closing of risks that are outdated. Project risk reassessments should be regularly scheduled. The amount and detail of repetition that are appropriate depends on how the project progresses relative to its objectives.
Risk audits examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified risks and their root causes, as well as the effectiveness of the risk management process. The project manager is responsible for ensuring that risk audits are performed at an appropriate frequency, as defined in the project’s risk management plan. Risk audits may be included during routine project review meetings, or the team may choose to hold separate risk audit meetings. The format for the audit and its objectives should be clearly defined before the audit is conducted.
Many control processes employ variance analysis to compare the planned results to the actual results. For the purposes of controlling risks, trends in the project’s execution should be reviewed using performance information. Earned value analysis and other methods of project variance and trend analysis may be used for monitoring overall project performance. Outcomes from these analyses may forecast potential deviation of the project at completion from cost and schedule targets. Deviation from the baseline plan may indicate the potential impact of threats or opportunities.
Technical performance measurement compares technical accomplishments during project execution to the schedule of technical achievement. It requires the definition of objective, quantifiable measures of technical performance, which can be used to compare actual results against targets. Such technical performance measures may include weight, transaction times, number of delivered defects, storage capacity, etc. Deviation, such as demonstrating more or less functionality than planned at a milestone, can help to forecast the degree of success in achieving the project’s scope.
Throughout execution of the project, some risks may occur with positive or negative impacts on budget or schedule contingency reserves. Reserve analysis compares the amount of the contingency reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining at any time in the project in order to determine if the remaining reserve is adequate.
Project risk management should be an agenda item at periodic status meetings. The amount of time required for that item will vary, depending upon the risks that have been identified, their priority, and difficulty of response. The more often risk management is practiced, the easier it becomes. Frequent discussions about risk make it more likely that people will identify risks and opportunities.
