The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process assesses and evaluates characteristics of individually identiﬁed project risks and prioritizes risks based on agreed-upon characteristics. 
 Assessing individual risks using qualitative risk analysis evaluates the probability that each risk will occur and the effect of each individual risk on the project objectives. As such it does not directly address the overall risk to project objectives that results from the combined effect of all risks and their potential interactions with each other. This can however be achieved through use of quantitative risk analysis techniques (see Chapter 7). 
 One step in the analysis is to categorize risks according to their sources or causes. If several risks arise from a common source, sometimes called a root cause, risk responses may be more effective when they focus on addressing this root cause. 
Identifying common effects from groups of risks allows identiﬁcation of the areas of greatest risk exposure (e.g. to the project completion date, the budget, or a particular deliverable’s scope), facilitating risk response focus in these areas. 
 The methods of qualitative risk analysis are applied to the list of risks created or updated by the Identify Risks process to provide project management with the characteristics of the risks that have the most inﬂuence (positive or negative) on achieving the project’s objectives. Risks that are assessed as high priority to either threaten or to enhance the achievement of project objectives will be an important focus in the Plan Risk Responses process. They may be further analyzed, such as in the analysis of the overall project risk that is discussed in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.
several factors that lead to successful qualitative risk analysis are described in Sections 6.2.1 through 6.2.4, and summarized in Figure 6-1. Agreement of the project stakeholders is a fundamental criterion and a common theme. The agreed-upon approach is the foundation of process credibility. Then, agreed-upon deﬁnitions enable high-quality information to be collected. Finally, with these conditions in place, the process can be executed reliably, which contributes to the credibility of its outputs.  
the process is based on an agreed-upon approach to this assessment that is applied across all of the identiﬁed risks in any project. By the nature of project risk, all risks may be assessed according to probability of occurrence and impact on individual objectives should the risk occur. Other factors may be considered in determining the importance of a risk as follows: 
  •  Urgency (proximity).  Risks requiring near term responses may be considered more urgent to address. Indicators of urgency can include the lead time necessary to execute a risk response and the clarity of symptoms and warning signs (also known as detectability) that may trigger the response.    Manageability. •   Some risks are not manageable and it would be a waste of resources to attempt to address them. The project team may examine these and decide to:  Go forward, perhaps establishing a contingency reserve.  ○ Stop or re-scope the project because these risks pose an unmanageable threat or an  ○ opportunity that should not be missed with high probability and consequences.  Inform the customer of the risks and ask for a decision from their point of view.  ○ I   impact external to the project. •    A risk may increase in importance if it affects the enterprise beyond the project.
the risk assessment should be based on agreed-upon deﬁnitions of important terms, and those deﬁnitions should be used consistently when assessing each risk. The use of deﬁnitions, for example, of levels of probability and of impact on objectives, assists the providers of the information in giving realistic assessments for each risk, and facilitates the communication of the results to management and other stakeholders.
collection of high-quality information about risks is required. Often this information is not available in any historic database and should be gathered by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment. Data gathered from individuals may be subject to reporting or intentional bias. When this occurs, the bias should be identiﬁed and remedied where possible, or a different, unbiased source of information should be found and used.
he success of qualitative risk analysis is enhanced if the process is used periodically throughout the project. It is impossible to know in advance all the risks that may occur in a project, therefore the Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Analysis processes should be repeated periodically for individual risks. The frequency of this effort will be planned in the Plan Risk Management process, but may also depend on events within the project itself. 
he Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process adds structure to the list of undifferentiated risks (see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) into categories of priority. Priorities are usually based on the risk’s probability of occurring and its potential impact on speciﬁc project objectives or on the whole project. Each identiﬁed risk is assigned a priority, perhaps by objective or for the entire project. This information is usually stored in the risk register which is easy to use and update with new information. The risk register list of prioritized risks is posted to the project participants who are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project plan. Risks that are judged to have high priority are segregated for further analysis and response planning and are generally monitored frequently. Risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch list and are reviewed less often for changes in their status.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is the process of prioritizing risks for further analysis or action by assessing and combining their probability of occurrence and impact. The key benefit of this process is that it enables project managers to reduce the level of uncertainty and to focus on high-priority risks. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 11-8. Figure 11-9 depicts the data flow diagram of the process.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis assesses the priority of identified risks using their relative probability or likelihood of occurrence, the corresponding impact on project objectives if the risks occur, as well as other factors such as the time frame for response and the organization’s risk tolerance associated with the project constraints of cost, schedule, scope, and quality. Such assessments reflect the risk attitude of the project team and other stakeholders. Effective assessment therefore requires explicit identification and management of the risk approaches of key participants in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. Where these risk approaches introduce bias into the assessment of identified risks, attention should be paid to identifying bias and correcting for it.
Establishing definitions of the levels of probability and impact can reduce the influence of bias. The time criticality of risk-related actions may magnify the importance of a risk. An evaluation of the quality of the available information on project risks also helps to clarify the assessment of the risk’s importance to the project.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is usually a rapid and cost-effective means of establishing priorities for Plan Risk Responses and lays the foundation for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, if required. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process is performed regularly throughout the project life cycle, as defined in the project’s risk management plan. This process can lead into Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Section 11.4) or directly into Plan Risk Responses (Section 11.5).
