qualitative risk analysis tools provide ways to distinguish those risks that are important for response or further analysis from those that are less important. The criteria that make a risk of interest to management are agreed upon in advance and implemented in the tools used. Output from qualitative risk analysis tools includes a listing of risks in priority order or in priority groups (e.g., high, moderate, and low). 
The tools for qualitative risk analysis allow the organization or project stakeholders to specify those levels or combinations of risk characteristics that make a particular risk of interest to management. Most tools assess a risk’s importance from a combination of probability of occurrence and degree of impact on objectives.
assessment of individual risks is based on information collected about them. Therefore, data collection and evaluation tools, including interviews, workshops, and references to databases of prior projects, require management support and attention. It is important to protect against bias in data gathering, which is important when relying on expert judgment for the information. 
some tools permit distinguishing a risk’s priority in terms of the affected objective. This capability provides a list of risks that are important for any speciﬁc objective of interest to management. This is useful since it is common for risks to have uneven impacts on various project objectives. 
There are reasons for constructing a measure of a speciﬁc risk’s importance to the entire project as contrasted with its importance to speciﬁc objectives. A common reason is for ease of communication with management and other stakeholders. When a single risk prioritization index is needed, the organization should be explicit about how that index is created. Usually, the index reﬂects the organization’s preference among objectives. The technique for creating the overall risk priority measure should be documented in the Plan Risk Management process.
Categorizing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probability and magnitude of project risk and to effective responses. Understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better understanding of the possibility and magnitude of project risk than if risks are only considered as separate and independent events. Identifying common root causes of a group of risks, for instance, may reveal both the magnitude of the risk event for the group as a whole along with effective strategies that might address several risks simultaneously. Alternatively, some risks may be linked with others in a causal chain, and understanding the chain of risks may lead to a better understanding of the implication of risk for the project. Identifying risks that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources. 
 Combining the results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process with the risk breakdown structure (see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) can show clusters of priority risks arising from speciﬁc sources. A combination of the risk analysis information with the work breakdown structure (WBS) can show which areas of the project exhibit the most risk. Assessing the high-priority risks’ impact on one objective, such as the schedule, may indicate which activities to address to reduce that objective’s uncertainty. All of these approaches can contribute to the realism and usefulness of the qualitative risk analysis. 
Risk probability assessment investigates the likelihood that each specific risk will occur. Risk impact assessment investigates the potential effect on a project objective such as schedule, cost, quality, or performance, including both negative effects for threats and positive effects for opportunities.
Probability and impact are assessed for each identified risk. Risks can be assessed in interviews or meetings with participants selected for their familiarity with the risk categories on the agenda. Project team members and knowledgeable persons external to the project are included.
The level of probability for each risk and its impact on each objective is evaluated during the interview or meeting. Explanatory detail, including assumptions justifying the levels assigned, are also recorded. Risk probabilities and impacts are rated according to the definitions given in the risk management plan. Risks with low ratings of probability and impact will be included within the risk register as part of the watch list for future monitoring.
Risks can be prioritized for further quantitative analysis and planning risk responses based on their risk rating. Ratings are assigned to risks based on their assessed probability and impact. Evaluation of each risk’s importance and priority for attention is typically conducted using a look-up table or a probability and impact matrix. Such a matrix specifies combinations of probability and impact that lead to rating the risks as low, moderate, or high priority. Descriptive terms or numeric values can be used depending on organizational preference.
Each risk is rated on its probability of occurrence and impact on an objective if it does occur. The organization should determine which combinations of probability and impact result in a classification of high risk, moderate risk, and low risk. In a black-and-white matrix, these conditions are denoted using different shades of gray. Specifically in Figure 11-10, the dark gray area (with the largest numbers) represents high risk: the medium gray area (with the smallest numbers) represents low risk, and the light gray area (with in-between numbers) represents moderate risk. Usually, these risk-rating rules are specified by the organization in advance of the project and included in organizational process assets. Risk rating rules can be tailored in the Plan Risk Management process to the specific project.
As illustrated in Figure 11-10, an organization can rate a risk separately for each objective (e.g., cost, time, and scope). In addition, it may develop ways to determine one overall rating for each risk. Finally, opportunities and threats are handled in the same matrix using definitions of the different levels of impact that are appropriate for each.
The risk score helps guide risk responses. For example, risks that have a negative impact on objectives, otherwise known as threats if they occur, and that are in the high-risk (dark gray) zone of the matrix, may require priority action and aggressive response strategies. Threats found in the low-risk (medium gray) zone may not require proactive management action beyond being placed in the risk register as part of the watch list or adding a contingency reserve. Similarly for opportunities, those in the high-risk (dark gray) zone, which may be obtained most easily and offer the greatest benefit, should be targeted first. Opportunities in the low-risk (medium gray) zone should be monitored.
Risk data quality assessment is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the data about risks is useful for risk management. It involves examining the degree to which the risk is understood and the accuracy, quality, reliability, and integrity of the data about the risk.
The use of low-quality risk data may lead to a qualitative risk analysis of little use to the project. If data quality is unacceptable, it may be necessary to gather better data. Often, the collection of information about risks is difficult, and consumes more time and resources than originally planned. The values used in the example in Figure 11-10 are representative. The numbers of steps in the scale are usually established when defining the risk attitude of the organization.
Risks to the project can be categorized by sources of risk (e.g., using the RBS), the area of the project affected (e.g., using the WBS), or other useful categories (e.g., project phase) to determine the areas of the project most exposed to the effects of uncertainty. Risks can also be categorized by common root causes. This technique helps determine work packages, activities, project phases or even roles in the project, which can lead to the development of effective risk responses.
Risks requiring near-term responses may be considered more urgent to address. Indicators of priority may include probability of detecting the risk, time to affect a risk response, symptoms and warning signs, and the risk rating. In some qualitative analyses, the assessment of risk urgency is combined with the risk ranking that is determined from the probability and impact matrix to give a final risk severity rating.
Expert judgment is required to assess the probability and impact of each risk to determine its location in the matrix shown in Figure 11-10. Experts generally are those having experience with similar, recent projects. Gathering expert judgment is often accomplished with the use of risk facilitation workshops or interviews. The experts’ bias should be taken into account in this process.
