Tools and techniques used appropriately for quantitative risk analysis have several characteristics, as follows: 

Risk models permit representation of many, if not all, of the risks that have impact on an objective simultaneously. They also permit the representation of both opportunities and threats to the project’s objectives. 
 
Quantitative models facilitate the correct calculation of the effect of many risks, which are typically identiﬁed and quantiﬁed at a level of detail below the total project, on the project objectives, which are typically described at the level of the total project. 
 
Probability models use a quantitative method that addresses uncertainty. Speciﬁcally, the methods should be able to handle the way uncertainty is represented, predominantly as probability of an event’s occurring or as probability distributions for a range of outcomes. A good example of this is the use of Monte Carlo simulation tools that permit the combination of probability distributions of line-item costs or schedule activity durations, many of which are uncertain. 
 
Data gathering tools used in this process include assessment of historical data and workshops, interviews, or questionnaires to gather quantiﬁed information—for example, on the probability of a risk occurring, a probability distribution of its potential impacts on cost or time, or relationships such as correlation between risks.
•	 Interviewing. Interviewing techniques draw on experience and historical data to quantify the probability and impact of risks on project objectives. The information needed depends upon the type of probability distributions that will be used. For instance, information would be gathered on the optimistic (low), pessimistic (high), and most likely scenarios for some commonly used distributions. Examples of three point estimates for cost are shown in Figure 11-13. Additional information on three-point estimates appears in Estimate Activity Durations (Section 6.5) and Estimate Costs. Documenting the rationale of the risk ranges and the assumptions behind them are important components of the risk interview because they can provide insight on the reliability and credibility of the analysis.
•	 Probability distributions. Continuous probability distributions, which are used extensively in modeling and simulation, represent the uncertainty in values such as durations of schedule activities and costs of project components. Discrete distributions can be used to represent uncertain events, such as the outcome of a test or a possible scenario in a decision tree. Two examples of widely used continuous distributions. These distributions depict shapes that are compatible with the data typically developed during the quantitative risk analysis. Uniform distributions can be used if there is no obvious value that is more likely than any other between specified high and low bounds, such as in the early concept stage of design.

Results from the quantitative tools are generally not available in standard deterministic project management methods such as project scheduling or cost estimating. Examples of these are the probability distribution of project completion dates or total costs and the expected value of a project decision. These results, when all risks are considered simultaneously, include the following: 
• Probability of achieving a project objective such as ﬁnishing on time or within budget.
• A mount of contingency reserve in cost, time, or resources needed to provide a required level of conﬁdence.
•  Identity or location within the project model of the most important risks. An example of this is a sensitivity analysis in a cost risk analysis or a criticality analysis in a schedule risk analysis. 

Commonly used techniques use both event-oriented and project-oriented analysis approaches, including:  Sensitivity analysis. Sensitivity analysis helps to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. It helps to understand how the variations in project’s objectives correlate with variations in different uncertainties. Conversely, it examines the extent to which the uncertainty of each project element affects the objective being studied when all other uncertain elements are held at their baseline values. One typical display of sensitivity analysis is the tornado diagram (Figure 11-15), which is useful for comparing relative importance and impact of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty to those that are more stable. The Tornado diagram is also helpful in analyzing risk-taking scenarios enabled on specific risks whose quantitative analysis highlights possible benefits greater than corresponding identified negative impacts. A tornado diagram is a special type of bar chart used in sensitivity analysis for comparing the relative importance of the variables. In a tornado diagram, the Y-axis contains each type of uncertainty at base values, and the X-axis contains the spread or correlation of the uncertainty to the studied output. In this figure, each uncertainty contains a horizontal bar and is ordered vertically to show uncertainties with a decreasing spread from the base values.
 
Expected monetary value analysis. Expected monetary value (EMV) analysis is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may or may not happen (i.e., analysis under uncertainty). The EMV of opportunities are generally expressed as positive values, while those of threats are expressed as negative values. EMV requires a risk-neutral assumption— neither risk averse nor risk seeking. EMV for a project is calculated by multiplying the value of each possible outcome by its probability of occurrence and adding the products together. A common use of this type of analysis is a decision tree analysis 
Modeling and simulation. A project simulation uses a model that translates the specified detailed uncertainties of the project into their potential impact on project objectives. Simulations are typically performed using the Monte Carlo technique. In a simulation, the project model is computed many times (iterated), with the input values (e.g., cost estimates or activity durations) chosen at random for each iteration from the probability distributions of these variables. A histogram (total cost or completion date) is calculated from the iterations. For a cost risk analysis, a simulation uses cost estimates. For a schedule risk analysis, the schedule network diagram and duration estimates are used. The output from a cost risk simulation using the three-element model and risk ranges. It illustrates the respective probability of achieving specific cost targets. Similar curves can be developed for other project objectives.

Expert judgment (ideally using experts with relevant, recent experience) is required to identify potential cost and schedule impacts, to evaluate probability, and to define inputs such as probability distributions into the tools.
Expert judgment also comes into play in the interpretation of the data. Experts should be able to identify the weaknesses of the tools as well as their strengths. Experts may determine when a specific tool may or may not be more appropriate given the organization’s capabilities and culture.


The success of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is enhanced if the process is used periodically throughout the project. It is impossible to know in advance all of the risks that may occur in a project. Often quantitative risk analysis should be repeated as the project proceeds. The frequency of this effort will be determined during the Plan Risk Management process but will also depend on events within the project itself.

Overall project contingency reserve in time and cost should be reﬂected in the project’s schedule and budget. Quantitative risk analysis provides information that may be used to modify the project plan. If the overall risk to time and cost indicates that an adjustment in scope is needed, the scope changes are agreed upon and documented and a new quantitative risk analysis is carried out to reﬂect the new aspects of the project. 

The contingency reserves calculated in quantitative project cost and schedule risk analysis are incorporated, respectively, into the cost estimate and the schedule to establish a prudent target and a realistic expectation for the project. Contingency reserves may also be established to provide for the capture of opportunities that are judged to be priorities for the project. If the contingency reserve required exceeds the time or resources available, changes in the project scope and plan may result. 
Also, the results of the analysis may provide more or less urgency to risk response (see Plan Risk Responses, Chapter 8) depending on the probability of achieving the plan’s objectives or the amount of contingency reserve required to provide the necessary level of conﬁdence. The results of a quantitative risk analysis are recorded and passed on to the person and/or group responsible for project management within the organization for any further actions required to make full use of these results.
